The Draw Of Gambling Lures Teens Toward Trouble
By Scott Ritter
Day Staff Writer
Hartford -- First came the petty thefts. Quarters taken from the coin jar. The filched debit card. Then came the excuses.

Next, the arrests. For selling pot to an undercover cop. For stealing cash from a dorm-room buddy.

To the half-dozen parents gathered in a basement room at the Wheeler Clinic here on a frigid February night, their children's descent into gambling addiction was as quick as it was painful. Now the three couples find themselves thrust onto the front lines of a growing problem — parents of the first generation of kids to be bombarded by the ante-up, feel-good message of gambling.

They let The Day sit in on a counseling session on the condition that their names and the names of their children not be used in a story. Such is the stigma, they say, of youth problem gambling.

“He got deeper in debt. He was playing (Internet poker) all night and sleeping all day. There were certain signs that we just totally missed. We questioned in our mind, but we never really did anything about it.”

As gambling becomes anchored in the mainstream, health officials say they're dealing with a small but growing number of adolescents and college-age kids struggling with addiction. Clinics across the state that until a couple of years ago hadn't treated any teenagers now see a few new patients monthly.

Every month, Foxwoods Resort Casino and Mohegan Sun each turn away about 400 people under the age of 21, some of them wielding fake IDs to try to get past security guards. Counselors say older siblings or friends sometimes serve as “modern bookies,” with Internet bets made surreptitiously with a parent's credit card.

At home, kids are barraged with poker on network and cable television, where NBC's “Poker After Dark” airs alongside the “World Series of Poker” on ESPN and “The World Poker Tour” on the Travel Channel. Visitors to Bravo's Web site, Bravotv.com, can play Texas Hold 'Em for fun 24-hours-a-day if they say they are at least 18 years old.

Once, a 21st birthday meant celebrating at a bar with friends. “Now, a majority say 'I can't wait until I'm 21 to go to the casino,' ” says Scott Guay, program coordinator for the Wheeler Clinic's addiction recovery services. “It seems like there's been a real shift in the rite of passage.”

“He's a big kid and got into the casinos pretty easily. Usually almost always went home broke. Everything he won he gave back.”

Connecticut officials are starting to take notice.

The state's Department of Education and Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services are spending $200,000 to take on the issue, money earmarked by state Sen. Andrea Stillman, D-Waterford, in last year's state budget.

The two state agencies are teaming up with a group of Yale University scientists and the Connecticut Council on Problem Gambling to survey high school students in the state to get a better picture of how widespread gambling and other risky behaviors — like drug and alcohol use — are among teenagers. The problem gambling council, based in Guilford, is funded largely by Foxwoods and Mohegan Sun.

The survey asks students how much they are gambling, what problems they're experiencing and what kind of prevention might be helpful to them, says Chris Armentano, director of the state Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services' Compulsive Gambling Treatment Program in Middletown.

Another survey funded by Armentano's program is gauging perceptions about gambling among middle school and high school students, teachers, coaches and administrators. Schools in Groton, Waterford, Norwich and Voluntown are among the 93 taking part across the state.

Combined, the data will be the most comprehensive the state has collected on the subject of adolescent gambling. Health officials hope the results will grab the attention of parents and educators when the reports are released in March.

“Gambling, at this point, is like drugs were in the mid- to late-60s,” says Armentano. “Young people knew a heck of a lot more than adults did in terms of what kids were doing with drugs.”

“For Christmas, we'd give him scratch tickets. Everybody got scratch tickets. It was fun.”

Separate from the studies, health officials are borrowing a program created in Missouri called “Beat Addiction: Choose the Right Path,” aimed at raising awareness among students in grades seven through 12. They're shopping the curriculum to health educators and school superintendents across the state.

Teens are particularly vulnerable to developing addictive behaviors as their bodies go through radical biological changes and peers and popular culture exert a stronger influence.

“A lot goes on in people's lives in adolescence,” says Dr. Marc Potenza, an assistant professor of psychiatry at Yale University School of Medicine and director of the Yale Problem Gambling Clinic.

The gambling habits of college students are also getting a closer look. The Citizens' Task Force on Addictions in New London County has launched a three-year, $60,000 program to examine and address problem gambling at Mitchell College and Connecticut College.

The task force is one of 14 regional action councils created by the state legislature in 1989 to help communities deal with substance abuse and gambling addiction.

Michele Devine, the group's executive director, says the survey will determine college students' attitudes and perceptions about gambling. Those results will be used to provide services on the campuses to minimize addictions.

“It's not about not gambling,” Devine says. “It's about being aware of the risks.”

“As parents, we'd all like to just pretend it didn't happen and go on with our lives the way they were before. But you're really changed forever. I don't know that you can ever have life the way it was before.”

Counselors say too few people — parents, lawmakers and educators alike — are aware of those risks. Some high schools still hold casino nights. NCAA basketball pools are popular in the classroom. Parents buy lottery tickets for their children.

“The messages for the youth are all very positive, very glamorous and very attractive and seductive,” says Patricia Devendorf, program coordinator for the Bettor Choice Gambling Treatment Program at Wheeler Clinic. “There are no prevention messages about gambling.”

Politically, gambling can be a thorny issue in a state that collects millions of dollars each month from slot machines and lottery receipts. Last year, Mohegan Sun and Foxwoods alone sent $427 million to state coffers.

“Are we really going to be willing to say, 'Hey, this isn't the great thing we say it is?' ” asks Guay, at Wheeler Clinic.

“He was just throwing his whole life away. He was so into it that he didn't realize it.”

Southeastern Connecticut's two casinos say they're serious about keeping minors off their gaming floors. Kids under 21 try to gain entry to Mohegan Sun's gambling areas on an average of 2,450 times a month, a spokesman says, and the casino escorts minors off the gaming floors about 400 times a month.

Casino security officials use scanners to verify driver's licenses. Cocktail waitresses, card dealers and slot-machine attendants are trained to keep a lookout for the underage, while surveillance cameras keep watch from above.

“We are very focused on the issues of underage gambling and drinking,” says Mitchell Etess, Mohegan Sun's president and chief executive. “We are constantly working to reinforce our policies. It's something we are very sensitive to and we know the population is very sensitive to.”

Contributions from the two casinos make up most of the half-million-dollar annual budget of the Connecticut Council on Problem Gambling, which among other things operates a 24-hour-a-day problem-gambling helpline, says Executive Director Marvin Steinberg. The state lottery contributes about $75,000 a year.

Meantime, young people continue to find new ways to wager on the Internet and elsewhere.

President Bush signed legislation recently that makes it illegal for a bank to transfer money to a Web site that offers gambling, but it remains to be seen if it will tame what Steinberg calls the “Wild West” culture of online gambling.

“The more forms of gambling, the more people gamble,” says Steinberg. “The more people gamble, the greater the problem gambling. It just goes hand-in-hand.”

“He talks about it now. He says he would sit for hours scratching (lottery tickets) in his car. He'd meet up with his friends who'd say, 'Come out, were going somewhere.' He'd say 'No, I'll catch up with you later.' Then they'd come back an hour later and the guy'd say, 'Dude, you've been here two hours scratching tickets?' And he'd say, 'Yeah.' ”
February 18, 2007 
