Lincoln Park Opening With New Look — And New Name
By Scott Ritter
Day Staff Writer
Lincoln, R.I. — Lincoln Park has a whole new look. And when it opens the doors on its massive expansion today, it'll also have a new name: Twin River.

The owners of the once-faded dog track, which began as a venue for thoroughbred racing in the early 1940s, have so far spent $220 million to renovate and expand the facility just west of Providence. Today, it opens an expansive New England-maritime-flavored gaming hall with 2,200 blinking and bleeping video lottery terminals — close cousins to the slot machine.

New, high-end restaurants are opening, like New York-based Carmine's, which will serve up outsized portions of Southern Italian cuisine beginning Tuesday. Last month, Fado, a richly detailed pub created in and shipped from Ireland at a cost of $6.5 million, began offering traditional fare like shepherd's pie and bangers and mash, along with properly poured pints of Guinness.

A 2,000-seat event hall will bring an eclectic assortment of music and sporting events to the Ocean State when it opens next month with a concert by the Goo Goo Dolls. The new Catch a Rising Star comedy club seats 200.

“We'd like to become the community center for Rhode Island,” says Len Wolman, a Twin River owner and chairman of Waterford Group PLC, the Waterford-based development company. “This is a fun place where you can really come and have a great time.”

The work began in earnest 12 months ago, and when it's all done early next winter, Twin River will boast 4,752 video lottery terminals. Only Foxwoods Resort Casino and Mohegan Sun in Connecticut and Bally's Atlantic City in New Jersey have more machines.

BLB Investors LLC, which bought the aging track from Britain's Wembley PLC for $440 million in 2005, is aiming to create a “first-class” entertainment venue that will draw gamblers and other visitors from as far away as Boston and Worcester, Mass., Wolman says.

It's also expected to capture some of the New England gambling cash that's currently flowing south to Foxwoods and Mohegan Sun. Rhode Islanders and Bay State residents spent $1.2 billion at the Connecticut casinos in 2005, according to the Center for Policy Analysis at the University of Massachusetts-Dartmouth.

Gerald S. Aubin, Rhode Island's top gaming regulator, says the expansion and renovation will help the track compete with the Connecticut casinos, even though Twin River can't build a hotel under its expansion agreement with the state.

“If you walked into Lincoln Park today, you'd see a facility that's similar to what Mohegan Sun has to offer,” says Aubin, director of the Rhode Island Lottery. “Len and BLB have done a remarkable job.”

The stakes are high, and not just for Twin River. Rhode Island takes a 60 percent cut of gaming revenues at Twin River and Newport Grand, the state's other slot-machine parlor. That is expected to amount to about $225 million this year, or about 7.5 percent of Rhode Island's annual revenue.

But state lawmakers have watched anxiously as gaming revenue at the two slots halls has been stagnant or falling. And the two venues face the threat of increased competition in New England, including the possibility that Massachusetts could approve slots at its racetracks.

In February, Lincoln Park's 3,149 machines reported revenues of $25 million, down 10 percent from a year ago, when it had about 430 more machines operating. Newport Grand's revenue was off almost 8 percent at $5.7 million. Newport, which also has plans to grow, has 1,070 video lottery terminals.

Construction at Twin River is partly to blame, and business there has already begun picking up as work is completed, says Cynthia Stern, vice president of public relations. The casino is projecting to draw between 15,000 and 20,000 visitors a day once work is completed, up from about 10,000 currently, she says.

Wolman expects big things from the track and casino.

“The facility was doing some pretty impressive numbers for the kind of facility it was — antiquated, run down,” he says. “We just saw a huge potential. We're giving people a lot of different entertainment options they can come here for. We've seen some great response so far.”

About 4 million adults live within 60 miles of the dog track and casino, says BLB Chief Operating Officer George Papanier. The old Lincoln Park drew gamblers from about a 15-mile radius, he says.

Wolman said track officials wrestled with whether to change its name in light of the remodeling and expansion work. Twin River refers to the Providence and Blackstone rivers, which converge near Providence.

Twin River's new main gaming floor is an airy expanse, with two-story ceilings and a nautical motif that includes decorative sails, piers and tall streams of green-blue seaweed. In the center is an open, 225-seat “lighthouse bar” that will feature free concerts, much like Mohegan Sun's Wolf Den.

Local musicians and national acts like Cherry Poppin' Daddies and 1980s new-wavers Flock of Seagulls are already booked to perform, part of the casino's efforts to attract younger visitors.

Earlier this week, workers hustled to put the finishing touches on the gaming floor, hanging stylized clouds from the ceiling and installing lights.

Painters touched up the dark wood paneling in a new sports-themed Fred and Steve's Steakhouse. Fred is Fred Smerlas, a five-time NFL Pro Bowl selection; Steve is Steve DeOssie, a former NFL linebacker who won a Super Bowl ring in 1990 with the New York Giants.

Chefs in the 300-seat, all-you-can-eat buffet practiced displaying fresh shrimp and cuts of beef that will be grilled to order. At Carmine's, the casino's largest restaurant with 581 seats, wait staff sampled wines, appetizers and entrees as part of their training.

Nearly 500 construction workers have been on the job for the expansion. Employment at the Twin River will climb by 500 — to 1,700 — when the work is completed.
March 23, 2007 
