Just The Ticket
By Scott Ritter
Day Staff Writer
If you like the feel of slipping quarters into the slot machines at Mohegan Sun, well, tomorrow's your last chance.

On Tuesday, those brash rows of blinking, beeping slots that fill the gaming floors at the casino will no longer accept coins or tokens.

Mohegan Sun is wagering that its players will embrace the switch to electronic-ticketing technology, which the casino has been phasing in for months now. Paper tickets a bit smaller than a dollar bill are replacing the once-ubiquitous plastic tubs of grimy nickels and quarters.

The “ticket-in, ticket-out” technology has already taken hold on the Las Vegas strip and along Atlantic City's boardwalk. With ticket in hand, players will be able to move easily among Mohegan Sun's 6,000 machines without having to visit a cashier to play a different game.

The casino wins too: the shift from coin has allowed it to trim 20 percent of its coin, cashiering and slot department staff over the past two years through attrition. Players redeem tickets at the more than 50 kiosks or nine cashier booths scattered throughout the gaming floors.

“We've pretty much completed the process now,” says Frank Neborsky, Mohegan Sun's vice president of slot operations. “There seems to be no backlash from the players.”

The move to electronic ticketing also means Mohegan Sun no longer needs all of the big coin-redemption booths that occupied prized space on the casino floor. Four new lounges designed by the Rockwell Group, the New York-based firm responsible for much of the Mohegan Sun's look and feel, are going up in their place.

The Lodge opened earlier this month across from The Cove restaurant in Mohegan Sun's Casino of the Earth. Visitors can order a drink and watch news or sports on big flat-screen TVs or play one of the 32 slot machines or video poker terminals built into the custom-made bar top. Casino executives say the lounge has proven popular.

“There were three deep standing at the bar on Saturday,” says Neborsky.

Harvest Moon, also with 32 games, is being built across from the expanding Asian gaming area. The Bow & Arrow sports bar, with 12 slot machines, is being relocated near the Seasons Buffet. In the Casino of the Sky, the 12-seat Sunset Bar opened in February next to the casino's new semi-private high-roller area.

On the other side of the Thames River, Foxwoods Resort Casino is undergoing a similar conversion. Nearly all of its 7,200 slot machines will be coinless by year's end.

Neborsky said the casino will stop redeeming Mohegan tokens June 1; cashiers will redeem coins through Sept. 4. 
April 29, 2007 
 
•