Atlantic City Rolls The Dice
Published 12:01AM | Updated December 15. 2009 10:01PM
By Scott Ritter
Day Staff Writer
Atlantic City — “You know what this town could use? Another casino.”

The new billboard along the Atlantic City Expressway pretty well sums up the attitude of this once-faded seaside resort, where a building boom is poised to transform the skyline.

Casino projects valued at upwards of $8 billion are either in the works or on the drawing board. Parts of the city's famed Boardwalk are getting a facelift. Shoppers can browse high-end stores like Burberry and Tiffany & Co. at The Pier Shops at Caesars, a sea-green, four-level mall that stretches across the beach and into the Atlantic surf.

Two blocks inland, 100 new outlet stores — everything from AC Harley Davidson to Brooks Brothers — line the streets. Forty more shops will open this summer. Five years ago, this part of town was a retail no-man's land.

Limits on building heights have been eased and construction cranes dot the sky, clustered around rising hotel towers. Overlooking it all, the 43-story Borgata Hotel Casino & Spa sparkles golden in the morning sun, a $1.1 billion mega resort whose wild success is spurring the city's latest effort to reinvent itself.

“I think the time is right to take Atlantic City to the next level,” says Diane Legreide of the New Jersey Office of Economic Growth. “I see wonderful things in the future.”

Atlantic City's first casino, Resorts International, opened its doors in 1978 and gaming revenues have grown modestly every year since, reaching $5.2 billion last year.

But the city's monopoly on East Coast gaming ran its course in recent years and burgeoning competition from nearby states like Pennsylvania, New York and Connecticut is beginning to take a toll. Many analysts think 2007 may be the first year revenues decline.

The year has not started well. April revenues were off 10 percent at $396.8 million, the New Jersey Casino Control Commission reported. Slot revenues fell 12.3 percent for the month while table games were down 3.1 percent. For the first four months of the year, the city's 11 casinos won $1.6 billion — a 4 percent drop from the same period last year.

Industry watchers point to Pennsylvania, which in 2004 legalized the use of as many as 61,000 slot machines across the state. Connecticut's Mohegan Tribe opened the state's first slots parlor in November, and the Mohegan Sun at Pocono Downs has so far exceeded expectations.

Two others — Harrah's Chester Casino & Racetrack and Philadelphia Park Casino and Racetrack — have since opened in the Keystone State, drawing day-trippers who might otherwise drive to New Jersey to play the slots. Two casinos are planned for the Philadelphia riverfront, including one backed by the Mashantucket Pequots, owners of the massive Foxwoods Resort Casino in Connecticut.

In New York, Yonkers Raceway added 1,400 slot machines in March, giving it a total of 5,500 games to make it one of the bigger casinos in the country. There's also the looming threat of casino gambling coming to the Catskills, which could further lure away visitors. A partial smoking ban enacted by the City Council in February has also hurt Atlantic City's gaming business.

As more gamblers choose to stay closer to home, industry analysts say Atlantic City needs to think big to set itself apart from its new rivals. Borgata, which opened its doors in 2003 and has since become the city's most profitable resort, is leading the way.

•••••

Borgata is a joint venture between Boyd Gaming Corp. and MGM Mirage and was the city's first major casino project in more than 13 years. Its high-end offerings like the Carina boutique and Wolfgang Puck American Grille have attracted a younger crowd that spends money not only on its gaming floors but also in its hotel, shops and restaurants.

Indeed, the industry likes the fact that just 73 percent of Borgata's revenue comes from slots, table games and other gambling sources, compared with 80 percent city-wide. In Las Vegas, where casino operators have been quicker to diversify their offerings, gaming now accounts for only about 40 percent of revenues, according to Wachovia Capital Markets.

No longer can casinos offer just “a buffet and a slot product,” says Kevin DeSanctis, a former Mohegan Sun executive who heads the newly formed Revel Entertainment Group. “It will not work.”

DeSanctis laid out some of his company's plans for a luxury seaside resort casino next to the Showboat Casino Hotel during an industry conference here earlier this month. The 5-million-square-foot project is still on the drawing board, but could cost about double what the Borgata did by the time it opens in 2011. Wall Street investment bank Morgan Stanley owns the 20-acre site.

“At the end of the day ... you're going to have to spend a lot of money to make an impact here,” DeSanctis says.

Pinnacle Entertainment Inc. is doing just that. The company will spend between $1.5 billion and $2 billion to tear down the 26-year-old Sands Casino Hotel, where the Copa Room once hosted big-name entertainers like Frank Sinatra, and erect a new casino in its place. Plans include a 2,000-room hotel, convention space, upscale shops and a large entertainment venue, all on 18 acres along the heart of the Boardwalk.

“Atlantic City again has to reinvent itself, and it's not done yet,” says Daniel Lee, Pinnacle's chairman and chief executive officer. The project is due to open in 2011.

On the southern end of the Boardwalk, a local investor group that includes former Caesars Entertainment Inc. chief Wallace Barr says it wants to build a casino on 11 acres next to the Atlantic City Hilton Casino Resort. Analysts estimate a price tag of between $1.2 billion and $1.6 billion.

Next door at the Hilton, plans are in the works to spend as much as $1.2 billion to build a 1,000-room hotel tower and to double the size of the gaming floor at what was Atlantic City's smallest casino. Gaming mogul Steve Wynn opened the luxury resort in 1980 as the Golden Nugget.

Meantime, Trump Taj Mahal, Harrah's Atlantic City and the Borgata are spending $1.2 billion to build new hotel towers that will add 2,500 rooms when they open next year.

•••••

To be sure, not all is shiny and new in this seaside resort town of 40,000, which fell on hard times in the mid-1900s with the demise of its once-grand hotels. Visitors to the Boardwalk can still get a tattoo at Lucky Lou's or a $20 “full-body” massage in one of the storefronts tucked between the T-shirt vendors and fortune tellers.

But signs of change abound. The New Jersey Casino Reinvestment Development Authority last fall announced a $100 million project to tidy up the Boardwalk's façade. The work is already under way.

The CRDA, using tax dollars paid by the casinos, also helped develop The Quarter at Tropicana, a three-story complex of shops and restaurants that aims for an Old Havana feel that opened in 2003.

Just off the Boardwalk, The Walk is an urban streetscape that links the casino district to the Atlantic City Convention Center about seven blocks away. Dozens of outlet stores, restaurants and nightspots like The 40/40 Club, a $4 million upscale sports bar co-owned by Jay Z, line the streets.

Baltimore-based Cordish Co. and the CRDA developed The Walk, which is set to expand in coming months and could ultimately include residential housing and more hotel rooms.

Industry executives and analysts say a stable regulatory environment and low gaming-tax rate (9.25 percent compared to about 55 percent in Pennsylvania) are helping attract the investment needed to expand beyond slot machines and all-you-can-eat buffets. And the demographics are excellent: 36 million adults over the age of 24 live within a six-hour drive.

“The reality is that there will be competition in the region,” says Andrew Zarnett, a gaming-industry analyst at Deutsche Bank.

 “The competition has convenience as their advantage. I don't underestimate that. But the guys that build destinations — true resorts like the Borgata — they will be absolute winners. There's no doubt about it.”
  May 14,2007