Pfizer’s Job Picture In Region Is Unclear
By Scott Ritter
Day Staff Writer
Southeastern Connecticut will remain home to Pfizer Inc.'s largest research-and-development operation even after it slashes its global workforce by 10 percent, or 10,000 jobs, over the next two years.

The world's largest drug maker announced the cuts Monday as part of a broader corporate overhaul designed to shave as much as $2 billion in costs by next year. The restructuring includes closing manufacturing plants and research facilities here and abroad, and consolidating R&D work at four U.S. sites.

That means scientists in Groton will focus their research on cardiovascular diseases, infectious diseases and neuroscience. About 100 jobs related to oncology research will be moved from Groton to the company's La Jolla, Calif., site, and cardiovascular-related research jobs in La Jolla could move to Groton.

Other R&D jobs are expected to come to southeastern Connecticut as part of the shakeup, which Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Jeffrey Kindler said will leave Pfizer better equipped to compete in a fast-changing business.

But Groton and New London, where Pfizer employs about 5,000 people, could lose other jobs when the company trims away several layers of middle management.

Pfizer spokeswoman Liz Power said the company doesn't yet know how many jobs will be lost or gained in Groton and New London. Employees have been told to expect more details in the next couple of months.

“In terms of job numbers, it's far too soon to say how the other shifts going on in the organization will impact Groton and New London,” Power said. She said the announcement “was very difficult for colleagues to hear.”

Employees got details of the restructuring in meetings Monday, including a midday standing-room-only gathering at the Groton campus. Later, Pfizer executives publicly unveiled the plans in a presentation to Wall Street analysts in New York, which many employees followed on the company's Web site.

“Pfizer is a great company with a great future,” Kindler told analysts. “But we are facing significant challenges in a profoundly changing business. Fundamental change is imperative, and it must take place right now.”

Indeed, Pfizer must deal with growing competition from generic drugs as it loses patent protections on some of its top sellers. In 2011, its best-selling drug Lipitor — a cholesterol fighter that generated just under $13 billion in sales last year — will go “off-patent.”

On Monday, Kindler vowed to redouble efforts to tout Lipitor's “unique package of benefits” and introduce campaigns in support of newer drugs like Chantix, for smoking cessation, and Exubera, an inhalable insulin. Pfizer will also step up efforts to acquire or partner with smaller companies that have promising products or technologies under development.

The centerpiece of the plan, though, is the move to cut 10,000 jobs worldwide, a figure that includes about 2,000 positions recently trimmed from Pfizer's U.S. sales force. Manufacturing sites in Brooklyn, N.Y., and Omaha, Neb., will close, and the company also hopes to sell a plant in Feucht, Germany.

From 2003 to 2008, Pfizer will have cut its worldwide manufacturing sites from 93 to 48.

Pfizer also said it will close three U.S. research sites in Michigan, including one in Kalamazoo, where the company will keep a large manufacturing and animal health operation. Research sites in Nagoya, Japan, and Amboise, France, are also slated to close.

The savings, projected to be as much as $2 billion by next year, will allow Pfizer to shift hundreds of millions of dollars into drug discovery and development work, said John LaMattina, head of Pfizer Global Research and Development.

Some local business leaders think Groton and New London may have dodged a bullet.

“It's good news, but it's also a challenge,” said Tony Sheridan, president of the Chamber of Commerce of Eastern Connecticut. “Pfizer has the potential of growing, but it will only grow if we can show the scientists of the world that this is a fabulous place to live, that we have the best schools, the best transportation systems and the best place to raise a family.”
January 23, 2007 
